@(#)bits: Twiddling the Bits: VIC-20 ROM Cartridge Exploration and Archiving
          by Ward Shrake (wshrake@aol.com)

@(A): Introduction
	    
This article's primary purpose is to enable you to understand the basic 
principles of making an archival backup of a ROM cartridge. However, I do 
wish to point out the following important points, before I begin: 

@(A): Disclaimer
 
1. This is NOT intended for any sort of illegal purposes! The  
   information can be misused, if one wants to badly enough. However, so can  
   virtually every other piece of information on the planet. Fire is a good  
   thing, as are hammers, saws, and other tools, but all of them can be  
   misused. I urge the reader to use this information in a proper fashion  
   and to take the time to reflect on what you are doing, to avoid hurting  
   anyone or anything. 
 
2. I am releasing this information for two basic reasons (besides basic  
   hacker pride in obscure technical knowledge).  First, the Vic20 died many  
   years ago. Commodore helped accelerate its death, by pushing the C64  
   computer onto the market, at a time when all the companies out there had  
   a lot at stake. I don't blame Commodore from a marketing sense; they just  
   wanted to stay alive themselves in a cutthroat market environment.  
   However, this means a lot of people still have the idea that the Vic20  
   was/is a piece of obsolete junk. This is not true, but the public acts as  
   if it were. The end result is that a lot of perfectly good hardware and  
   software is thrown away on a regular basis. Once it is in a landfill  
   somewhere, it’s rather difficult for anyone to use it! Hence my two-fold  
   concern: to help show the public (and Commodore Guru types) the Vic20 is  
   a very cool gaming machine, and to physically rescue the software for the  
   system before all of it is lost forever. I take little pleasure in  
   thinking that 50,000 years from now some archaeologist will dig up our  
   landfills and think we must have had some really cool stuff! 
 
3. I really like the term "Digital Archaeology." (I wasn't the first to  
   use it, however.) Basically, it means that with the many rapid advances  
   in the computer sciences, lots of stuff gets lost or forgotten in the  
   rush to replace everything every few years. Whereas an entire  
   civilization might take hundreds or even thousands of years to die out  
   and be all but forgotten, the history, lore, and software of computers  
   can be gone in just a few years. If we don't revive it now, who will  
   remember how to use any of this stuff? There are only a few people around  
   now that can do it, and their memories are getting fuzzy with the passage  
   of time. I don't mean to preach; I just think this is as good a time as  
   ever! 

A small group of concerned individuals, myself included, have begun the
task of archiving all the VIC-20 cartridges known to exist.  The project
also includes documenting every aspect of the VIC-20 hardware and how
it operates.

@(A): General information about Vic20 cartridge software 
 
A Vic20 cartridge is approximately 5.5 inches wide, 3 and 3/8ths inches  
deep, and 5/8ths inches tall, when viewed as if ready to be installed.  
Most of the cartridges that were made by Commodore are either a beige or  
dark brown colored plastic with a tan or metallic all-text label. Some  
third-party companies had more interesting looking cartridges; most of  
the plastic cases were black as a general rule, with white also being  
used at times. In rare cases, oddly-shaped carts existed, for example,  
carts by UMI. Some of these seem to be more epoxy-based than plastic,  
with glitter inside it! Only a few companies really had fancy, full- 
colored labels on their cartridges. 
 
The most common memory configuration, inside the casing, is one bank of  
8k. ROM was standard for the larger companies, but EPROM's were also used 
at times, even by Commodore themselves. Four-kilobyte cartridges do 
exist, as do 8k cartridges made up of two banks of 4k chips. (Memory was  
expensive then, as you can no doubt imagine, and some companies had to  
make due with whatever they could get cheap enough.) 16K cartridges do  
exist as well, although the bulk of these were done by the largest  
companies. Commodore made a few 16k carts, as did Atari, Sega, Hes, and a  
few others. 
 
If other standard cartridge memory configurations existed in the Vic's  
day, the author is currently unaware of them. (I would like to hear of  
any, if they do/did exist, especially if they were once made  
commercially.) There may be a few exceptions, for instance, for carts  
that modified the Vic20's own inherent abilities; for example, 40 and 80  
column boards. But the rule of thumb here is that 8k was the accepted  
standard, with 4k and 16k at times. All of these cartridge 
configurations, by the way, are using 8-bit memory because the Vic20 is  
an 8-bit computer. 
 
Inside a typical Vic20 cartridge is one double-sided, etched circuit  
board, with some form of memory chip(s) on it. This may be a "standard"  
IC chip as we are used to seeing (24 or 28 pin ROM, in a DIP package), or  
it could be a blank circuit board, with a tiny blob of black epoxy  
material on it, under which are presumably the internal components of a  
typical, normal ROM chip. 
 
The standard circuit board size is approximately 3 and 9/16ths inches  
wide, and 1 and 3/4 inches deep. A cart fits into a 44-position, double- 
sided card edge connector, located in the back, left hand side of the  
Vic20. 
 
On the cart circuit board itself, there might be several wire traces or 
jumpers, which, if there, are meant to configure the cartridge to a  
certain memory arrangement. These jumpers are meant to connect the BLK or  
RAM lines to the system ground. These lines, when connected, tell the  
Vic20 where to place the cartridge within the Vic20's internal memory  
mapping scheme. 
 
While all "normal," autostart game cartridges are located in one fixed  
area of memory, this is not true with all cartridges. A rare few of the  
total Vic20 cart collection did not use the autostart procedure; you had  
to type in a systems number to start the program running after inserting  
it. These are very rare, however (6 out of 150+ so far). Most cartridges  
all autostart after insertion and power-up, just as cartridges do in game  
console systems. 
 
All this memory banking may seem confusing. If it does, remember this:  
Every cartridge that autostarts must have at least one bank of memory in  
Block 5, or the autostart procedure will not function. If it autostarts,  
there has to be some memory in Block 5. That may help relieve some  
confusion. There may be additional memory installed as well, in some  
cases, for more storage space. The location of this additional memory is  
less important than the location of the autostart bank.  However, there  
are only three additional 8k banks left, for a total of four banks of  
user-added RAM or ROM memory. The Vic20 was built when memory was  
expensive, and computers were designed to be bare-bones memory-wise with  
the capability to expand on later. This may take some getting used to at  
first, but understanding it gets easier in time. Take it in stride for  
now. 
 
@(A): The Cartridge Auto-Starting Feature
 	  	    	 	  	 
Please note that if you already understand the autostarting system used  
in the Commodore 64, this is nearly identical in procedure. Only certain 
codes and memory locations differ; the rest applies to both machines. 
 
The "normal" spot for an 8K cartridge to be located in memory is in  
"Block 5"(which is located at $A000 to $BFFF). Again, this is not the  
only possible spot in memory for a cartridge to be located, but it is the  
only spot where the Vic20 will look for a cartridge that automatically  
starts on power-up. This is because (at power up) the Vic20 looks for a  
precise code in a precise spot to see if it should autostart a cartridge  
or not. If the Vic20 finds this EXACT five-byte code, EXACTLY where it is  
supposed to be located in memory, the Vic20 turns control over to the  
cartridge. If not, it gives over control to the user, via the normal,  
power-up Basic READY prompt screen. 
 
 
   This 8K autostart sequence code is shown below: 
 
   Address      Hex value     Decimal value    ASCII values 
   	  		 		   
   $A004        $41           65               Capitol "A" 
   $A005        $30           48               Digit "zero" 
   $A006        $C3           195              Reverse "C" character 
   $A007        $C2           194              Reverse "B" character 
   $A008        $CD           205              Reverse "M" character 
 
(You may note that the code above is symbolically saying $A000, and  
Commodore Business Machines. In other words, that this is the right  
software, for the right machine. The C64 uses $8000 instead.) 
 
If the computer finds this five-byte sequence exactly as shown, it turns  
its control over to the machine language program in the cartridge. To do  
so, it needs to know where the program begins. There are four bytes which  
determine this, as shown in the chart below. Note that this is in the  
cart, not the Vic20.  
 
   Address      What this byte of information contains
   
   $A000        Low-byte  of 16-bit "cold start" address (power-up) 
   $A001        High-byte of 16-bit "cold start" address 
   $A002        Low-byte  of 16-bit "warm start" address (restore key) 
   $A003        High-byte of 16-bit "warm start" address 
 
Let's do a quick summary of this before we go on. You plug a cartridge  
into the Vic20. You turn the power on. The Vic20 starts its own built-in  
operating system software. It gets itself ready to be used, either by the  
user (in BASIC) or by a cartridge's program. 
 
One of the last steps in the computer's start-up sequence is to look at a 
certain spot in memory, to see (A) if there is a cartridge inserted  
there, and (B) if it is the proper type. It does both these tasks through  
simple assumptions. Assuming that the existence of an autostart code
sequence at a certain memory address implies a cartridge is present, the
computer looks for the "A0CBM" code sequence. If it finds it, it then
transfers control to the locations specified at $A000-$A003, as defined
above.  (In many cases, this address is $A009 or 40969 ... the next  
byte possible after all the start-up codes.) 
 
@(A): How to Archive Vic20 ROM Cartridges
 	     		       		 
Now that we know how the autostart process works, what can we do with  
that information? Well, to archive a cartridge's internal ROM memory to  
either tape or diskette, you have to know how the autostart process  
works. This is necessary because you have to figure some way around it to  
be able to get to that "no carts inserted" normal power-up screen. This  
means that you then have full control of the machine, instead of the  
cartridge being in full control. 
 
Simply put, there are only two steps to archiving a cartridge from its  
cart to disk or tape. 
 
1. Find some method of defeating the autostart process, so that the  
   Vic20 powers up with the cartridge in memory, but does not start it up.  
   So that you are in control, instead of the cartridge running the show. 
 
2. Copy that area in memory where the cartridge resides, to tape or  
   disk. The resulting program is called an "image" of the cartridge's  
   memory. 
 
After that, assuming there is no copy-protection coded into the original,  
you have a working version of the program stored on disk/tape instead of  
on ROM. 
 
Some problems may arise, but don't worry, they are easy to get around if  
you know how to do it. 
 
A. There may be more than one block of memory to copy. The one found at 
   Block 5 is easy, because if the cart auto-starts, there must be memory  
   that needs to be copied. However, additional memory may be present. You  
   will need to determine where it is, and how much of it there is. 
 
B. Depending on how you transferred the image to disk (assume I mean  
   "disk or tape" from now on), was the loading address information stored  
   with the image? If it was you can reload it easily next time. Without  
   those two important address bytes (these are separate from those we  
   discussed earlier), the software won't load properly, and so will not  
   work. 
 
OK, so now you're convinced it’s impossible, right? For every problem,  
there is always a number  of solutions. I wrote a small program that  
eliminates most of the problems inherent in archiving carts, and have  
figured out ways of eliminating most of the hassles. The program also  
makes the process more reliable, since archiving rare and cool things is  
the main idea. I'll make that program publicly available, soon, after a  
bit of polishing. 
 
But you still have to get around that auto-start procedure. Without doing  
that first, you are dead in the water before you've even started. So,  
here's how you get around the autostart procedure. After that, its all  
downhill!  
 
There are a number of suggested methods shown below. My suggestion is to  
pick out the method you like best and stick with it. The rest will just  
be to satisfy your built-in hacking curiosity, OK? Other methods exist  
but I didn't feel they warranted the space here. These are some of the  
best ways. 
 
@(A)method1: Inserting a Cartridge Into a Powered Computer
      
Please pay attention to what I am about to say: this is the only method I  
DO NOT recommend! I mention it mainly because it represents a very real  
risk of killing your hard-to-replace Vic20 computer system. This is 
supposed to be an exercise in keeping things alive and usable, not 
killing more off! If you feel you want to try this, you do it at your own  
risk!  
 
I once knew a guy that wanted to archive Vic20 carts, but wasn't willing  
to go to a lot of effort to find a good way to get around the autostart  
feature. When he told me what he was doing, I tried to warn him. He kept  
on doing it, saying he'd "just be careful."  The next thing I know, he is  
asking me how to repair a computer that died suddenly. I told him the  
truth: (A) you don't, you go find and buy another one, and (B) you listen  
to me the next time I tell you that you're risking your almost  
irreplaceable hardware. 
 
If that didn't convince you, well, I tried. There are better methods, by  
far! If you can't find a better one than this, pay someone to modify your  
Vic20, or just loan the cart in question to someone who is more used to  
doing this! 
 
@(A)method2: Altering Your Computer's Operating System ROM
 
What this method does is change the copy of the code to check for, inside  
the Vic20, so that no cartridge's unaltered code ever matches it. So no  
autostart. 
 
No cart will ever match the modified start-up code in your new operating  
system, so none will ever be seen as a cart. However, having one of these  
chips installed permanently could be a bad idea, as you cannot test or  
start your saved images quite as easily. The image won't autostart  
either, unless you are willing to keep swapping chips back and forth, or  
unless you know how to decode the starting addresses and type in systems  
numbers. 
 
This is an elegant way to solve the problem, providing you possess tools
to read and program EPROM ICs and can obtain replacement ICs that
are pin-compatible.  Thus, the elegant solution requires a substantial
amount of resources.
 
However, one chip does exist, which is expensive if you buy it new, and  
may be hard to find as well. (Try posting to "comp.sys.cbm.") If you can  
find a Motorola 68764 chip, you're almost there! Just copy the Kernal rom  
to disk, modify the "A0CBM" code found there to be anything but that, and  
burn a new EPROM of your modified Kernal rom. The manual to the Promenade  
EPROM-writing machine makes programming these chips a snap. And the  
Promenade is still available today, from it makers, Jason-Ranheim Co.  
(Phone: 916-878-0785, or 1-800-421-7731.) These same 68764 chips work  
with C64's internals, too. 
 
This does work. It has the advantage of requiring no modifications to  
your Vic20 which can't be easily reversed. Before I got tired of swapping  
Kernal chips back and forth, this was my preferred method of archiving  
cartridges. 
 
@(A)method3: Using a Cartridge Port Epander
 
I've come to feel that a plug-in board is the best way to modify things  
just long enough to get past the start-up process, skip the autoboot  
phase, and get down to business. If you can find one, buy it! It makes  
life so much easier and nicer, in more ways than just this one. I highly  
recommend buying one. 
 
Basically, this device lets you plug in lots of carts at once, and with  
just a button press, decide which one to use at any given time. Well,  
that switch is all you need! Just (A) turn the computer off and insert a  
cartridge, (B) make sure all the switches are de-activated, (C) turn the  
computer on. You should now be looking at a normal, BASIC power-up 
screen. Now (D) press the button that activates the slot that your  
cartridge is plugged into, so that the cartridge is now mapped into  
memory properly, although belatedly, and (E) follow the instructions in  
the next part of this text, to archive the cart.  
 
Note that you can modify your Vic20 to do the same thing if you are handy 
with a soldering iron. But as I don't want anyone killing their only  
Vic20, maybe I'll save that for another article ... this one is almost at  
deadline, and I don't want to rush things and make any mistakes!(Besides,  
I don't know yet if anyone is interested enough to modify their Vic20's  
to do this??) 

@(A): Saving One or More Blocks of cartridge Memory to Disk or Tape
 
Once you've defeated the auto-start feature of the Vic20, the memory  
contained in the cartridge is just another block of memory as far as the  
Vic20 is concerned. You have full access privileges, with all that goes  
with it, including the ability to save it to external storage. 
 
You have three basic choices to save the block of memory to tape/disk.  
You can either (A) wait until I release my program that does it  
automatically, or (B) use a "memory save" feature of a machine language  
monitor program (not built in) to save the 8K block of ROM memory, or you  
can (C) just change four POKE's in the Vic20's memory. With this, your  
cartridge is seen as if it were in the BASIC program memory area so that  
the built-in "SAVE" command works. 
 
It really works. The beauty of it all is that no additional programs are  
needed. To save any block of cartridge-usable memory in the Vic20, just  
type in four easy POKE commands, then tell the Vic to SAVE the program as  
it would normally save any BASIC program. (You can even copy the system  
ROMs that way, if you want to.) 
 
For those of you already familiar enough with Commodore's style and  
memory arrangement schemes to make sense of this, bytes 43 and 44  
(decimal, not hex) are the pointers to the Start of Basic memory area,  
and bytes 45 and 46 are the pointers to the Start of Variables, or in  
other words, the End of Basic. Follow this chart, to save a block of  
memory from these areas via pokes: 
 
   Block #   Hex Address     Poke 43,x   Poke 44,x    Poke 45,x  Poke 46,x 
     5       $a000-bfff      x = 0       x = 160      x = 0      x = 192 
     3       $6000-7fff      x = 0       x = 96       x = 0      x = 128 
     2       $4000-5fff      x = 0       x = 64       x = 0      x = 96 
     1       $2000-3fff      x = 0       x = 32       x = 0      x = 64 
 
Here's an example: to save block 5 (the most commonly used memory block)  
you do the following steps.  
 
0. Follow the previous instructions, to get to this point. (The  
   cartridge has been inserted, power is now turned on, and the autostart 
   has been defeated. The Vic20 is showing you its normal BASIC power-up  
   screen.) 
 
1. Type the following, hitting RETURN after each line. (Type  
   carefully!) 
 
     POKE 43,0                  (and return) 
     POKE 44,160                (and return) 
     POKE 45,0                  (and return) 
     POKE 46,192                (and return) 
     SAVE "FILENAME.EXT",8      (and return) 
 
2. Wait for the disk drive to finish its saving process. (Be patient.) 
 
3. If you have more 8k blocks to copy, repeat all the previous steps,  
   but adjust the POKE statements, according to the information in the  
   chart. Note that the pokes to 43 and 45 are always zero; even page  
   increments. Also, note that the computer will get confused or lock up if  
   you try to copy another block of memory without starting completely over. 
 
4. When the busy light turns off again, turn the Vic20's power back  
   off. Remove the cartridge, and if you have a modified 8k or 16k RAM  
   expander insert it or activate it. If you have a 32k RAM expander, you  
   can use it. 
 
5. Load the disk's directory up, (or rewind the tape), and see if the  
   file has been properly saved to the disk. It should show a file size of  
   33 blocks, if all has gone well ... 32 blocks x 256 bytes each = 8k, plus  
   one block for the disk drive's overhead and the file loading address. 
 
6. If everything looks fine so far, just load the newly created "image" 
   into RAM memory, to see if it runs. Remember a few tips: as with the C64,  
   you always have to use the  ,8,1  loading conventions for any machine  
   language program to reload into memory back where it came from. 
 
   Also, to properly load up an image that has more than one 8k bank, you  
   will have to type NEW after each load to reset some memory pointers.  
   Otherwise, it moves BASIC to where the cart now is and gets confused. So  
   multi-loads are: (A) LOAD"file1",8,1   (B) NEW   (C) LOAD"file2",8,1 
 
7. The last step is starting up the image, to see it in all its new  
   glory! To do this, all you have to do is (A) press the reset button  
   you've installed yourself, or if you don't have one installed, (B) type  
   the following "reset" command into the computer...  SYS 64802  (and  
   return). 
 
8. At this point, your image is probably running. If it is not,  
   carefully recheck all the previous instructions. You may have made a  
   mistake or two there, somewhere. (One mistake I have often made is to  
   forget to re-activate the expansion chassis' slot, and essentially save  
   empty air.) 
   
@(A): Troubleshooting
      		     
But if you recheck everything, and it STILL doesn't work, try archiving  
another cartridge. If the first does not work, but the second one does,  
you have likely found one of the few protected carts out there. How to  
"break" the copy protection is way out of the scope of this article, so I  
can't help you there! Sorry. But usually, everything will be fine by now,  
if you've followed the instructions carefully, step-by-step. Only about
10% of the VIC-20 cartridges were copy protected.

=========================================================================

