   -------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Short technical tutorial on Vic20 ROM cartridges, including notes 
       on cartridge archiving methods, and the Vic autostart process.
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Vic20 cartridge is approximately 5.5 inches wide, 3 and 3/8ths inches deep,
and 5/8ths inches tall, when viewed as if ready to be installed. Standard
configurations are 8K and 16K of 8-bit ROM memory, using one or two chips of 
ROM memory onboard. If other standard cartridge memory configurations exist, 
the author is currently unaware of them. (But would like to hear of any, if 
they do/did exist, and especially if they were once made commercially.)

Inside a typical Vic20 cartridge is one double-sided, etched circuit board, 
with some form of memory chip installed. This may be a "standard" IC chip as 
we are used to seeing (24 or 28 pin ROM, in a DIP package), or it could be 
a blank circuit board, with a tiny blob of black epoxy material on it, under 
which are presumably the internal components of a typical, normal ROM chip. 

The standard circuit board size is approximately 3 and 9/16ths inches wide, 
and 1 and 3/4 inches deep. A cart fits into a 44-position, double-sided card 
edge connector, which is a permanent part of the Vic20 itself, in the back.

On the cart circuit board itself may (or may not) be several wire traces or 
jumpers, which if there, are meant to configure the cartridge to a certain
memory arrangement. These jumpers are meant to connect the BLK or RAM lines
to the system ground. These lines, when connected, tell the Vic20 where to 
place the cartridge within the Vic20's internal memory map scheme. 

While all "normal," autostart game cartridge are located in one fixed area
of memory, this is not true with all cartridges, game or not. Some of the 
earliest cartridges did not use the autostart procedure for whatever reason,
(presumably because they did not know it existed, at that early stage?) and 
those are located in "non-standard" memory locations. The Vic20 was built
and designed when memory was expensive, and computers were designed to be 
bare-bones memory-wise, but with the capability to expand on later. This may
take some getting used to at first, but understanding it gets easier in time.

16K cartridges, for example, generally have one 8K ROM block located from 
$A000-$BFFF, and another 8K ROM block located at $6000-7FFF. If a cartridge 
was factory-made not to autostart; in other words, if it needs you to type in 
a "SYS" number to start it, its memory could be located in any block. 

The "normal" spot for an 8K cartridge to be located in memory is in "Block 5" 
(which is located at $A000 to $BFFF). Again, this is not the only possible 
spot in memory for a cartridge to be located, but it is the only spot where 
the Vic20 will look for a cartridge that automatically starts on power-up.
        
This is because (at power up) the Vic20 looks for a precise code in a precise 
spot, to see if it should autostart a cartridge or not. If the Vic20 finds 
this *exact* five-byte code, *exactly* where it is supposed to be located in 
memory, the Vic20 turns control over to the cartridge. If not, it gives over
control to the user, via the normal, power-up Basic READY prompt screen. 
       

        This 8K autostart sequence code is shown below:

        Address______Hex value_____Decimal value____ASCII values
        $A004        $41           65               Capitol "A"    
        $A005        $30           48               Digit "zero"
        $A006        $C3           195              Reverse "C" character
        $A007        $C2           194              Reverse "B" character
        $A008        $CD           205              Reverse "M" character
        
If the computer finds this five-byte sequence exactly as shown, it          
turns control over to the machine language program in the cartridge.
To do so, it needs to know where the program begins. There are four
bytes which determine this, as shown below: (Also within the cart.)

        Address______What this byte of information contains__________
        $A000        Low-byte of a 16-bit "hard start" address (to begin at)
        $A001        High-byte of the 16-bit "hard start" address
        
        $A002        Low-byte of 16-bit "warm start" address (restore key)
        $A003        High-byte of 16-bit "warm start" address

This is all very important when trying to archive an image of the information
contained on a ROM cartridge. Altering either of the two required parts of 
this sequence, causes the cartridge to not autostart, but to be mapped into 
memory properly, anyway. Assuming a certain level of technical expertise, a 
user can do one of two (or more?) things to achieve this. 
        
One is to move the cartridge's starting location temporarily, so that the 
code is present, but not in the right place. This can be done by altering the 
physical traces on each cartridge's circuit board. This is undesirable, 
except perhaps for self-training purposes, as every single cartridge would 
have to be individually modified, archived, then reassembled for normal use. 
Permanently modifying the Vic20's internal wiring is also possible, but 
hardly desirable, as permanent damage to the Vic20 might also result.
        
The best way I could recommend for this would be to have a qualified tech 
build or wire a cartridge-port pass-through device, where nearly all the 
traces re-connected where they are supposed to, except for a critical few. 
Using a 44-position card edge connector, some wire and a junk cartridge (or
etched circuit board like a cartridge's pins), this could be done. Most wires
would start at the card edge, where you'd plug the device into the Vic20, and 
pass-through harmlessly to the card edge connector, where carts would plug in.

This device reroutes the "BLK 5" trace, preferably by use a "normal/modified" 
switch, so that even though the cartridge intends to load at $A000, it loads 
to another 8K block of memory instead. Whichever one you wire it to; perhaps 
Block 1 or 3. Make the switch(es) act as a simple pass-through, normally, but
disconnect the "Block 5 to ground line" while at the same time connecting the 
"Block X line to ground", to remap where the cartridge will temporarily go.

This device would ideally be plug-in-able and removable, like a cartridge, so 
as to require no modifications to either the Vic20 or cartridges. A reset 
button could also be installed in the device, as well, while you're at it. If
you use an old cartridge as your plug-in on the Vic20 end, cut all traces that
still go to the existing chip(s). Solder wire ends onto the portions that exit
the Vic20, and route them to your external plug-in connector box. If you use
ribbon cable as your wiring, you can probably even sneak the wire out the back
of the existing cartridge's case, as there is a wide slot in most Vic cases!

This method will allow you to temporarily re-map where the cartridge image
will appear in memory, to defeat the autostart feature. Once this is defeated
the technically-inclined user who is familiar enough with Commodore computers
can copy the information to tape or diskette for storage. This takes some 
knowledge and expertise, but can be learned. Some help is offered; see below.

The user should understand that if this method (memory relocation) is used to
defeat the autostart feature, and to thereby attempt to archive a cart's ROM,
the work is not over. Once archived to disk, the hard part is done, true, but
when you saved it to diskette, it was saved with a now-incorrect starting 
address. Before the image can be used further, this has to be corrected.

This can be changed, fairly easily, by someone who knows how, but it requires 
knowledge of using a software tool called a "disk sector editor" to change 
the now-incorrect high-byte of the relocated starting address, to the correct
unrelocated high byte: where it would have been, before you moved it. To do 
so, you find the first disk sector of the ROM image file, and change the 
fourth byte in (not byte $04!) to be $A0, resave the sector, and you're done.
After this modification, your ROM image files will now load where they should,
(into $A000 RAM, if you have it), and are ready for further processing. 

Even the common C64 "Fastload" utility cart has a very servicable sector 
editor in it, so it isn't as bad as it may have sounded. Still, you need to 
know how to use it, and what to change, so it is best left to a professional.

To actually save the block of memory to tape/disk, you either use the memory
save feature of a machine language monitor program (not built in) to save the
8K block of ROM memory temporarily, or you can change certain POKE's in the 
Vic20's memory, to tell it your cartridge is located in the Basic program 
memory area, so that the normal SAVE command works. The beauty of the latter
is that no additional programs are needed to make this work; just type in four
POKE commands, then tell it to SAVE as it would normally save a Basic program.

For those of you already familiar enough with Commodore's style and memory
arrangement schemes to make sense of this, bytes 43 and 44 (decimal, not hex) 
are the pointers to the Start of Basic memory area, and bytes 45 and 46 are 
the pointers to the Start of Variables, or in other words, the End of Basic.
Follow this chart, to save a block of memory from these areas via pokes:


   Block #___Hex Address____Poke 43,x___Poke 44, x___Poke 45, x__Poke 46, x
     5       $a000-bfff      x = 0       x = 160      x = 0      x = 192      
     3       $6000-7fff      x = 0       x = 96       x = 0      x = 128
     2       $4000-5fff      x = 0       x = 64       x = 0      x = 96
     1       $2000-3fff      x = 0       x = 32       x = 0      x = 64
                                                                    

The above is only one possible way to archive an 8K block of Vic20 memory.
However, a second method exists, requiring some Vic20 modifications. A truly
hard-core Vic user could alter the copy of the startup code that is stored in 
the Kernal ROM chip, so that no normally-correct autostart sequence code ever 
matches it as long as your new Kernal is in place.
        
Remember, there must always be *two* copies of the start-up code; one in the 
cartridge itself and one stored in the computer for comparison. If either of 
these two seperate codes are altered, even slightly, it will not autostart! 

The cartridge gets mapped into memory at its correct location, but the Basic 
"READY" screen comes up instead, giving the user full control. Once you've
achieved this, you simply do four pokes (to change the start and end of BASIC
memory to match where the cart code is), or save the info with an ML monitor.

With some work and an "MCM 68764" 8K EPROM, this can be done. It is not just
a vague theory; the author has done it. It works, as does a similar technique 
for doing the same general thing with the Commodore 64 computer. (With the 
appropriate changes, of course, to reflect the C64's different architecture 
and memory map; the C64 codes are "CBM80" instead of "A0CBM", and the Kernal 
expects that code to be in a cartridge at locations $8004-$8008 instead of 
$A004-$A008. Starting address is in the same exact format as the Vic's.) 
        
This a much more involved modification, and not for the squeemish or 
those who only own one Vic20 (or C64) without any spares to fall back on! 

To do it, you need a heck of a lot of computer knowledge specific to the 
computer you're working on, an eprom burner, an eprom eraser, and patience.
You have to search in the Kernal's memory image, for the start-up code, and
modify those bytes to be something different than they are, while leaving all
the other bytes just as they are. This alone takes some serious skills, no?
You also need skills and tools in desoldering and removing IC chips, as well
as soldering in IC sockets, and not destroying anything in the process.

I won't go into this much, because I don't imagine many people will bother to
actually attempt this method, since the other has some serious pro's to it, 
and since this should be about enough info to go on; if you can't figure out
how to do this modification with this info, you probably should not try it, 
until you've progressed enough at a later time. Or, have someone else do it
for you, with these instructions, if you really want it done badly enough.

This way may appeal to some people, but I recommend the other for most folks. 
The overly-technical types might be tempted to go ballistic however, and more 
power to you! A thought, in parting; one could put 2 copies of the Kernal ROM 
chip, one stock and one modified, into one 16K eprom, with an external switch 
to flip between the two versions. (Or just go lower tech, and just manually 
swap out Kernal chips as needed; most Vic20's seem to have sockets anyway.)

Whatever you do, I hope you've enjoyed this article! Later, all!

Ward Shrake, July 1995


P.S. -- Recently added notes to myself, that others may find useful....

 - You can cheat a little, to tell ahead of time if a cart is 8K or 16K, or
   what. Not all pins are always connected, where the cart plugs into the 
   computer. If a lot are missing, that's good. If you know this little 
   trick, you can amaze your friends by "reading" that visually, like a code,
   to tell what kind of memory set-up the cart is using. Follow these steps:

   Hold the cartridge in your hand with the label facing you, and the gold
   pins pointing straight up into the air. (Be sure to follow that exactly, 
   or this little trick will not work.) Just hold it, and look at it.

   Look at the row of gold pins, all pointing upwards. From the left side of 
   the row, start counting pins. Ignore the first nine. Pay attention only 
   to the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth pins. Ignore the rest. 
   
   If pin 13 is there, but pins 10, 11 and 12 are missing, the cartridge is  
   a "normal" 8K ROM cartridge, loading at $A000-BFFF or block 5. That means
   that the ROM-image copying methods above will work just fine on it.  
   
   If pin 13 is hooked up, and so is pin 12 but the other two are not there,
   that cartridge is likely a 16K cartridge, which is harder to copy, and 
   requires slightly different / more complex methods. (You can still copy 
   the upper half, or block five, just like an 8K cartridge, though. The 8K
   at $6000-7FFF requires some additional work.)

   If pin 10 or 11 is hooked up, and 12 and 13 are both missing, it loads in
   block 1 or 2, respectively. If there's only one pin there, its 8K. If two
   are hooked up, its 8 times two, or 16K. (Cartridges like this are 
   possible, but I doubt very much they are common, if they even exist.)
   

 - Sometimes you need to do a bit of exploring after saving a ROM image. To
   see the addresses a cart is using on power up (cold start) or on a warm
   start (reset button instead of cycling power completely), do this. After 
   saving a normal "block 5" 8k file to disk, press reset, then type...
   
   PRINT PEEK(40960)+PEEK(40961)*256
        to get the cold start address. Type the following...
   PRINT PEEK(40962)+PEEK(40963)*256
        to get the warm start (second) starting addresses to try. Don't 
        forget to write them down, when you see the onscreen answers.

 - You can automate the above and save later typing. I've written the above
   into a BASIC program format, and saved it onto diskette. (Just write the
   above as a basic program, and save it to a disk yourself. Essentially,
   just add "10" in front of the first line, "20" on the second.) After 
   saving a particular ROM image file to diskette, do the following steps...

   Power off, then take the cartridge you just copied out of the computer.
   "Insert" your RAM expander (located in memory at $A000, of course.)
   Power on, or if using a slot expander, press reset to clear everything.
   Type in the load command to load the image back in (using ,8,1 syntax.)
   Type NEW, to prepare to load a BASIC program in the normal fashion / area.
   Load up your little warm/cold start figuring program. (Mine is "Sys".)
   Type RUN to run it. 
   Write down the two starting addresses, for safe keeping later.
   Try the first (cold) starting address first; type sys (the number) return. 
   If it starts up, fine, circle that one, and consider that the startup code.
   If the first number doesn't start it, reset, reload, and try the second.
   





